this video is brought to you by
Skillshare become a member for free for
two months with the link down below one
of the greatest things about PC gaming
is access to a really long backlog of
games from previous generations usually
a PC game has to be really old for it to
no longer work in your computer and
often it comes down to some OS
compatibility issue or at the DRM or a
Terrell a service which often can be
remedied in the realm of consoles things
are not as simple let's say
hypothetically that you really like a
certain game series and their games on
that series are exclusive to consoles
and some of those consoles have been out
of production for a while unless there's
a remake or remaster you are forced to
hunt down a used copy and then find a
working compatible console with all the
trouble that comes with it especially
when backwards compatibility is not
something you can always take for
granted and since these games are only
made to work on a console and it's a
specific architecture there is no way to
know that we run them on PC so how about
we use a program that rubs an entire
virtual console of sorts and then that
virtual console runs the game welcome to
the fascinating world of emulators
marvelous programs created by brilliant
and intrepid programmers to simulate the
old consoles and run their games now as
some of you know I tend to avoid the
topic of emulators and PC due to their
complicated legal status every time I
bring this topic up I am bombarded by
conflicted information without science
and it is really hard to figure out what
is actually going on if only I knew of
some lawyer who was also a youtuber and
had a catchy superhero like name I sense
that someone needs legal advice
[Music]
oh look if it isn't Devin from legal
eagle the YouTube channel where a real
lawyer analyzes movies and shows from a
legal perspective examines the realism
of legal procedures in media and
examines real-world law how convenient
mind giving me a hand with this issue
yeah thanks for the kind words Alex the
reason that this all seems complicated
and confusing is that it's all very
complicated and very confusing so it's
not surprising that a lot of people
often get this wrong and a lot of the
law related to emulation and roms is not
really particularly tested in the United
States but at base the thing that most
people get wrong that they need to
remember is that video games are art
video games are copyrightable in the
same way that a movie is copyrightable
or a song is copyrightable so if it's
clear that you can't share a movie or a
song legally you probably can't share a
ROM of a video game in the same way and
it gets more complicated than that
because generally speaking in the United
States emulators themselves the actual
software that does the emulating is
legal it's okay generally speaking to
have a piece of software that emulates
another piece of hardware now there are
exceptions to that but just because the
emulator itself is legal absolutely does
not mean that the wrong is legal and it
also doesn't mean that you were legally
able to create that ROM in the first
place a lot of people will claim that if
you actually own the cartridge or video
game itself that you're legally allowed
to make a ROM from that cartridge and
that's probably not even the case either
a lot of people will point to a portion
of the Copyright Act which deals with
fair use specifically 17 USC one one
seven that particular aspect of
copyright law allows you to make what's
called an archival copy it's but not
really tested but it probably doesn't
apply in this case for one you're not
really making an archival copy when you
make it wrong really what you're trying
to do is space shifting which is what
Napster argued a few years ago when they
said that you own the copy of the song
from the CD you're just simply shifting
the space in which you are listening to
it and the court didn't agree the court
said that that was an illegal derivative
copy and that you weren't allowed to do
that even
if you own the actual CD itself it's
possible and this is relatively untested
that that applies to roms as well so the
bottom line is that while emulators are
probably illegal and that's probably
still an open question
making the roms themselves or possessing
the roms probably isn't it's probably
copyright infringement it probably does
not qualify as an archival copy and even
if it did odds are that the DMCA the
Digital Millennium Copyright
anti-circumvention protections might
apply and might get you into trouble
anyway so that's a long way of saying
that it's a complicated and complex area
of the law that is relatively untested
that there's a lot of bad information
out there and there aren't gonna be a
lot of clear answers you're welcome
thanks Levin make sure to check the
legal eagle youtube channel he will make
you passionate for legal issues that you
will have fought boring before now
emulators have an important part of
gaming culture because as time passes
and hardware becomes broken emulators
are fundamentally important for the
preservation of older games emulators
are also an interesting piece of
technology when trying to emulate the
game it is easy to simply read some
approximate specification of the power
level of a new console compare it to a
modern PC and think it's not a big deal
but you will probably be wrong since
running an emulator is not simply like
running a native PC game but rather
going through the process of almost
recreating a virtual version of the
console and then running a game on it
the performance overhead can be massive
a rule of thumb usually mentioned in
these discussions is that to emulate
assistant you have to need a computer
ten to twenty times more powerful than
the original system and even something
as broad as that has to be taken with a
grain of salt a simulation overhead
varies tremendously depending on code
optimizations how different the target
machine is from a PC and the million
other factors still as a technical
challenge it is tremendously interested
we know computing has made tremendous
advances in the last decade and it is
amazing to think that some of the best
computers out there are powerful enough
to do impressive things regarding
emulation but they are powerful
expensive computers have was powerful to
do but how has technology progress on
the cheaper side of
spectrum I keep bringing up the
earth-moon 3000 GE because people will
not click a video if I'm not using it I
keep bringing up the athan 3000 D
because it is very representative of the
way entry-level PC components seem to
continue increasing in power it uses an
architecture for its CPU and GPU that
while not bleeding edge is modern enough
to incorporate a lot of the limitations
that allow getting the most power out of
each core since this is a bit behind the
current aim degeneration it is very
probable that they have already mastered
the production and can make them very
cheaply in fact I will not be surprised
if these are made from Reisen and beak a
course that has some defect and gets
them repurposed since AMD has gotten a
bit crazy with the core cams lately
having a couple of decent course is
barely an expense or an issue and since
this course were designed to work in
much higher amounts
the termo overhead of using just a
couple is kind of insane which is likely
where you can overclock it so easily as
technologies trickles down and the
expensive components give way to
innovation on the lower end I start
asking myself it's a $50 CPU and GPU in
2020 10 to 20 times more powerful than
the console that was hundreds of dollars
in 1995 2000 2006 I will be running this
whole thing in the setup worthy of the
title of budget PC as it runs in a cheap
be 350 motherboard a cheap power supply
a cheap SSD and RAM at 26 66 megahertz
all build together in 20 min sandbox
instead of a case which even with very
evident airflow issues can easily
overclock to 3.9 gigahertz for the CPU
and 1.6 gigahertz fourth a GPU if you
wonder why there's a PC built into a box
a couple of poles from the Spanish tech
YouTube
scene we're visiting recently I needed
to borrow a bunch of glowing components
for a number of videos and after a look
at the final result they built I just
could not drive myself to take it apart
because it's just how fun it looks even
if it's terribly inconvenient to use in
north side notes let's start with the
old a is the start of 3d home console
graphics in 1995 by 1996 the Nintendo 64
was notoriously tricky to program for
and inspects same funny when looking at
retrospective but they were
actually pretty powerful for its time
just limited by its cartridge format
interestingly enough most games here on
a 320 by 240 and occasionally 640 by 480
and he reached frame rates that were
often closer to 20 fps more than they
were to 30 and they say I am crazy it
was a wild time and everyone was willing
to do sacrifices for 3d emulating a
Nintendo 64 is to no one's surprise
relatively easy a cheap phone can
probably do it and enough for 3000 G can
easily do it as a much higher HD like
resolution like 20 80 by 960 well
enhancing anti aliasing anisotropic
filtering this is running on project 64
there are patches to log further
performance but it runs best as well as
it did on the original console not much
of a surprise the PlayStation is often
argued as less powerful than the
Nintendo 64 but with much superior
distribution medium and will output a
similar 256 to 224 to 640 to 480 but
what does power matter two decades later
Metal Gear Solid is the game that was
tremendously innovative at the time and
continues to be a fascinating piece of
media while they did eventually receive
a PC port that is suspiciously absent
from any digital game distribution
service it was originally a PlayStation
1 game and using the EPS XP emulator it
can easily run at four times the
original PlayStation resolution it can
be a bit jarring to look at this
graphics we have the benefit of a lower
resolution but I still think it looks
neat that was easy
let's jump one generation and see how we
will do the gamecube use a PowerPC
architecture meant to be easier to
develop that the Nintendo 64 will still
be in small a powerful outputting all
games at 640 by 480 the maximum
resolution that only a handful of
Nintendo 64 games ever did
emulating GameCube is still
significantly harder due to the
increased complexity but a tremendous
amount of resources and time have been
spent by the community to the task
the dolphin emulator is very effective
very stable and performs really really
well for this test I run f-zero at three
times the internal resolution to
basically make it HD and Direct X as its
renderer and it run perfectly
only running occasionally into some of
the video or audio starter that is
typical of emulation for this test
I chose f0 for several reasons first
it's a fantastic game and I think when
the most under appreciated titles of
this generation and it was the last time
we ever saw an FC row game and hey
Nintendo if you copyright claim this
video because you're making a new NC row
game I wouldn't even be mad second it
was a title that natively run at 60fps
on GameCube which exemplifies the rising
complexity of this generational skip and
conversant a challenge for emulation but
nope it's business as usual and consider
that I'm using the latest stable build
from Dolphin which is older and the
better releases have some great
performance improvements on the other
side there's a PlayStation 2 the
best-selling console of all time it
could be argued that it was quicker than
GameCube but this was still during a
time where all the consoles were so
architectural II different from each
other then making direct comparisons was
very tricky
it still outputs at the same resolution
as the GameCube 640 by 480 from an
emulator side however this console is
extremely interesting for the longest
time PlayStation 2 emulation had had a
reputation of being significantly CPU
heavy so there's a lot to be said about
the trickling down of Technology when a
modern cheap dual-core seems to have no
issue playing Metal Gear Solid 3 which
was never released on PC seriously this
is doubly interesting for a number of
reasons on the original PlayStation 2
this game was running at 480p and 30fps
the emulator is running it at three
times the native resolution and 60fps
with only suspicious slowdown studying
certain cutscenes looking at the
resource usage there's still a
surprisingly amount of computing power
left from the CPU and GPU so it is not
as bad as I could initially assume it is
fascinating to me that this one's CPU
heavy task is accomplished but but so
many people considered a pretty weak to
a core CPU let's do a short detour
before jumping on to the next generation
the Nintendo Wii cemented Nintendo
strategies of abandoning the competition
or our computing power to instead focus
on unique value propositions while
technically a next-generation console
that we was focused on controls and
therefore often was compared to a couple
of GameCube Stape together in terms of
he still outputs 480p just with
anamorphic widescreen and can be
emulated by the same emulator the Tusken
cube unsurprisingly
is still perfectly achievable with three
times internal resolution for a year
Kathlyn this is us Forrest's I feel
risking the Nintendo emulators for now
since their lawyers are always watching
but I have saved the best for last the
PlayStation 3 release was a fascinating
case study it took the markets obsession
for graphical improvement to the maxed
delivering a console that was so
expensive it became a meme PlayStation 3
will retail for 599 u.s. dollars five
hundred and ninety nine hundred ninety
nine man the internet was so different
back then it's bordered a processor that
was so advanced at the time that
literally the United States Air Force
built a supercomputer using one and a
half thousand Playstations to analyze
like satellite imagery what it was also
apparently so complicated to code that
it took developers years to actually
start making graphically impressive
titles so of course the efforts to
emulate this tech nightmare Fox have
been intense and fascinating or PC s3 is
a fantastic open source project that is
trying to achieve this very thing now
while I do not want to downplay the
achievement that is this emulator I do
wanted to make it clear that we're
starting to get into the territory of
extreme active development when
considering the increasing computational
power required you have to think that
this is the generation that finally jump
to HD and that made a huge change in
pixel count even we have considering the
topic of performance a significant
number of ps3 games are still not
available in fact picking a game to test
here was an interesting challenge
because a large number of the
best-selling titles of a platform is
just stuff that is on PC and you can get
off the OG or steam when you narrow the
search for exclusives a large number of
the best titles are labeled as being
able to booth
public bugs that prevent the title from
being completed and again I don't want
to downplay that shipment the simulator
does but keep in mind that this is along
the limits of what we can reasonably
emulate if you jump
generation there is no working emulator
for ps4 no matter what some malware
align and fakes make you believe however
at the time of writing one game that is
fully playable is the original demon
souls and as someone who really likes
this old borns franchise bla Sakura I am
totally contain Sakura and is constantly
frustrated that some of the games are
not available on PC the fact that Demon
Souls which has never been released in
any other console can be emulated this
very interesting and the iPhone gets so
tantalizingly close to being able to do
it this game runs natively on the ps3 at
720p and 30fps and when the emulator
misses the 30fps lock the audio can
glitch quite a bit so it's not while you
can power through it at 22 fps like you
can do so many other PC games as you can
see by the CPU usage what we are running
into is a very clear case of not enough
CPU power to do with the emulation
overhead I often get asked to do videos
on graphical thinking of emulator games
but since these were games that were not
designed to have graphical settings the
methods to do so are limited and often
non-existent here I was using the Vulcan
renderer which does improve performance
a fair bit but there is very little that
can be done with just a basic lack of
CPU power and yet this is honestly
significantly closer to a working state
than I expected out of this component
put it this way let's make an extra
experiment and add one more thing on a
previous video I found a bare-bones kit
that allowed me to build a tiny tiny PC
powered by a rising 330 200 G whose
usability I cannot overestimate ever
since I built it for that video it has
never left my desk I even use it as a
Linux gaming experiment and I keep
finding new uses for it seriously there
was a great build I am now going to find
further use for it by running the exact
same experiment and configuring it for
ps3 emulation and discovering that I can
also now use the small box to plug it
into my TV and play demon zones to jump
to a new word 12 nanometer architecture
posted 2 extra cores makes all the
difference in the world while still
being a good example of the principle of
technological improvement that I keep
mentioning the 3200 G is a generation
behind
the cpu architectures of mainstream rice
and CPUs and is therefore able to be
produced at a very competitive price
which is all the more impressive when
you see them elated in a machine that
was marketed to be bleeding edge of
console graphical technology 14 years
ago so while it is easy to dismiss some
of the newer cheaper components during
the hype building up to a new generation
of weeks it is interesting to track how
new technologies trickle down into
cheaper more accessible parts that are
still theoretically many many times
stronger than top-of-the-line hardware
from a decade and a half ago and that is
pretty neat and if I can add a secondary
conclusion to this is that emulators and
their development are tremendously
important for game preservation and
honestly anyone who has contributed to
an open-source emulator project has my
respect and my money in some cases ps4
emulation is still a long way to go but
I'm willing to wait just you wait my
love and still far but I will be coming
for you someday in the meantime if you
want to contribute to open source
emulation projects you can do so with
your time and skills instead of money if
you don't have any skills and there are
ways to develop them for example this
intro to user design usability that is
necessary when you want to learn
anything about user interfaces which
every project will always use especially
when emulators can have a bit of a steep
learning curve how about any other skill
Joe the low spec editor mainly uses
Adobe Premiere to edit so I needed to
get the basics of it fast in order to
work better with him so I took this
course Premiere Pro in 45 minutes by
documentary maker Dandan live and Pam
did that title live up to its name
because in 40 minutes I was working
Dandan Leo also has a great course on
color correction that I did last year
anyway the point on this whole segue is
that every time I need to learn
something new for my work my first stop
the stage is Skillshare does video
sponsor and maybe you should consider
doing the same skill sure is an online
learning community for credits where
millions come together to take the next
step in the creative your day it offers
thousands of inspiring classes for
creative and curious people on topics
including illustration design
photography video freelancing and more
skill sure has classes to fit your
schedule and skill levels as
think I have demonstrated skill assure
is also incredibly affordable especially
when compared to pricey in-person
classes and workshops another
subscription is less than $10 a month
and I can make it cheaper for you
the first 500 of my subscribers to click
in the link in description and screen
will get a 2 month free trial of premium
membership so you can start learning
stuff fast go show this simple they have
been supporting creators like me for a
long time now thank you to them for
sponsoring this video on you for
watching
[Music]